Yes, this community has
met on several occasions and we
continue talking and fighting about the same things
on the same issues.  Uh, yesterday
Alex Godoy was saying that it's like
Groundhog Day, he was saying, because we
always get together to talk about the same
things and push for what matters to us,
right?  And in that sense,
I wanted to start with you, Sara, you who have had
great experience in the
private sector and also a lot of contact with the
public sector, because you have worked
with different governments, different
ministries, in different commissions,
what are the biggest challenges we
have today to carry out
quality private conservation?
Thank you so much.
There's a microphone there.  There should be.  Yes.
So that we can hear you.  It's
on.  Okay, we're listening.
Perfect.  Thank you so much.  Well,
thank you very much for the invitation.
And likewise to Travolution and to the
University of congratulations for the
initiative.  I think it's incredibly
important that we meet.  There is too much
work to do.  Uh, we have a law,
as Mauricio said, it took us about 11
years in the National Congress.  There
we were with that law, but it's a
law that has 12 regulations and we've only had about
four of them, so
we have several more years and I think it's
tremendously important that we continue to meet
and that we can
put pressure on the
field in order to speed up the regulation, to
facilitate conservation.  Hoy día la
regulación, a pesar de que se hace este
servicio de biodiversidad y aes
protegida, eh que es un marco general,
no necesariamente es facilitador
de de la conservación,
es facilitador en la medida que genera
un marco que antes no existía.  Given that the
only alternative that
private individuals had to enter into a legal framework with
obligations was through the
National Monuments Council to become a sanctuary,
and by virtue of that there are more than 100
sanctuaries in the metropolitan region,
or rather, at the national level.
In Chile, of course,
in Chile,
in the region there are like 12 or 13, right?
In the metropolitan region we are 13.
13. However, these 13 sanctuaries,
which are 13 families or 13 communities,
constitute 11% of the surface area of
the metropolitan region,
which is not insignificant, where the state
has not put a single one, let's say, in terms
of maintaining these areas every
day.  And the state, with the Río de los Glaciers park and the multi-use protected area, Río Colorado, Río Olivares, will be equated with private areas, and therefore we will have in this region about 20% of the protected area in binding terms, because there are also small initiatives, but they have not dared to sign up to be obligated to have a management plan.
And the important thing, I would say, about
private protection is that it opens up the
space for people to
support the national task of
protecting biodiversity.  So,
what's missing to motivate
private protection?  I believe that the
first step is to facilitate the processes of
both supporting the
formation and implementation of
management plans.  Most
of us private conservationists
are neither biologists nor
natural resource engineers; we don't have the
expertise, we don't have the resources to
finance someone to create
management plans for us and be there
permanently.  Therefore, support
in management plans and
collaborative,
not just supervisory, oversight
of how these conservation plans are developed
is essential.  Therefore,
a state arm is required to
promote or incentivize conservation,
and
first, to approve them, right?  Because there are
several that are not approved, let's say.
Absolutely.
And then that they support that
support with a theme of accompaniment
and collaboration.  Of course,
because ultimately the State of Chile will
be evaluated at the
biodiversity convention for everything it protects, both
public and private.  Therefore, there needs to be
harmony between
compliance with management plans for
public areas and
private areas.  And that also
requires financial support.  And that
financial support is not there.  There is, of course,
a small environmental protection fund
, there are small things, but that does
not constitute  The only thing we've had
in recent years that's a
bit more substantial in terms of money are the
emissions compensation plans, that is,
all the atmospheric emissions from
Santiago that are captured in these
protected areas.  But there is no more depth.
We pay wealth tax,
just like anyone else who is
making productive use of
the sector, even by exploiting it.  So, it's a
situation of great inequality.
That doesn't make sense, does it?  Because deep down you are, let's say, on private land, but you are handing over a public asset, therefore you shouldn't pay taxes as a productive development.
Exactly.  They renounce exploiting, let's
say, natural capital as you
pointed out,
but instead allocate it for the conservation
of biodiversity, which is a
public good for everyone, but that is not
recognized and they charge you the same
fees as if you were using it.
Therefore, there needs to be a
regulatory and collaborative approach, and there needs to
be a financing approach,
including fiscal policy,
and therefore the tax situation
cannot be the same as any other
exploited field.
S. Thank you very much, Sara.  Hey,
to add to that, well, Sara, as I
introduced her, is the president of this network
of holy nature and of course
also the president of, uh, Chile
Sustentable, which, how many years has
Chile Sustentable been around?  26,
26 years of work, that is, very very
relevant.  And I'd like to ask
Fernanda now, so that we can
complement this perspective,
right?, that Sara has given us.
What do you think are the
key factors for strengthening this
conservation system at the private level?
Fernanda.
Well, that's a difficult question, but I
think we're at a crucial moment today
, as Sara explained.
We see regulations flying by and we're not
able to, for example, keep
track of everyone who will be
competing with each
other's actions.  Well, I represent, I am here not
only from Cantillana but also
representing Así Conserva Chile,
which is a trade association of
voluntary conservation initiatives where there are
areas of different types
in 13 regions of the country.  In fact,
except for Sara, all the other panelists
have areas under their charge that are members
of Si Conserva Chile, the Costa
Valdiviana reserve, the Caruquinca Park and the
elemental reserves in three regions
of the country.
So, the diversity is enormous within, for example, our associates, and from that perspective, at this moment, a lot of things are happening.  You
were talking about the row you're in of the
urban wetland with the Mapocho River.
We are in the same line as the
urban wetland of Laguna de Aculeo and
well, with several
nature sanctuaries, not only in this region, in
another there is a line of more than 5 years in the
approval of the management plans.
So, now that's it, it
also demonstrates the precariousness of the services
that have to do with the environment,
because I feel that there is a precariousness
not only in the State in
environmental terms, but also, obviously, in the
part that is transferred to the
private sector.
For example, the
Environmental Superintendency, which is another
important service for all
environmental damages, has a backlog of more than
5,000 complaints that have not been
addressed from the last three, I don't know
how many years.  Then, and that's when you
realize that biodiversity in general
is being undermined on all sides and the
forces, and therefore the
resources, which is ultimately what it is, are not
enough to protect it.
There are amendment laws, there was an amendment law to the CEA, I don't know what's going on, but ultimately what advanced the fastest was the one on sectoral permits, which yesterday was also discussed in terms of the permitting process that ultimately sets back many things that had been advanced with great effort.  So, today we are at this
super crucial moment in which
the biodiversity service is being established
.  Many
decisions are being made that will determine how
those
regulations, those laws, and those services will operate
in the future.  For us, the
private protected areas, which previously did not
have a service under
our responsibility, because although the
Monument Council and the Ministry of the
Environment had jurisdiction over the
sanctuaries, it is not the same as having a
service as such, right?  CL
transversal functions.  Okay, so, well
, we need to tighten things up.  I think that to
sum it up, there's one issue here:
nature conservation is
incredibly expensive.  It is not expensive if one evaluates and quantifies, values ​​the natural capital and ecosystem services that one ultimately receives, because a public or private natural area produces exactly the same ecosystem services.
In these regions, the only ones where there is no
more public land, the only way to
advance conservation is with
private land.  However, although it produces
the same services, it does not receive the same
state funding.  So, that
's an issue.  Sometimes even the
State doesn't fully grasp how
expensive conservation is, because, for
example, these regions are the
most threatened areas and you need a lot of money
to control forest fires,
illegal uses, and many other things.  So,
people now believe that the areas take care of
themselves.  That's an issue that needs to be
addressed first.  They don't take care of
themselves, they require a lot of work and that's
something that still is, well, still does, and deep down
because all these
ecosystem services ultimately have a value
for what they provide, but they also have
a maintenance value.
So, positioning that
is not only something good and desirable,
but something necessary, something
we need for development at its
core.
Yes. This assembly of areas, which was the way the territory was constituted before we occupied it, are ultimately what sustain human systems.
That's how it is.
So, ultimately, it's a matter of survival
.
Thank you very much, Fernanda.  I would
now like to ask Francisca because, uh,
Filantropía Cortéslari has innovated
quite a bit in the reserve, hasn't
it?  Working, in conservation.
You can tell us a little about it there, but I wanted to
ask you what models you have
looked for or implemented to achieve
effective conservation.   Can you
hear me?  And yes, it
sounds perfect.   Already.
Well, uh, good morning.  Thank you
all.  Actually, thanks to the
university as well for taking these
initiatives that are relevant today
for what we are experiencing.
Well, let me tell you that we have been
working for 25 years, we started
with education, basically our
strength was education, but from the
beginning we understood that education
had to be related to
nature, because basically
nature is what gives us
all the learning and a lot, a
lot of learning.  So, our
goal was always to
find ways to compensate for education,
but in conservation areas.  And that's where
these three territories that we
have today come from, latitude 22, 33 and 44.
These three territories.  It's not that
we chose those latitudes, but it
was like a mere coincidence, but in
reality we know that coincidences don't
exist.  Actually, this was super
important for us because
it really started to organize us
and show us how to implement a
private conservation plan, since we didn't
go the other way because if
we really wanted to wait for
public policies, or really,
I would always say I'll be dead the
day I can do a project, so
we actually decided on a
path that has to do with
private conservation, obviously it
has a fairly high cost, which is what we
have talked about before,
but obviously with a challenge.  What is
the model we have used
to organize ourselves?  We have a
model that talks about four
fundamental dimensions.  We're talking about
what's natural.  In the natural world we work
on the threats
and the animals in danger of
extinction.  So, basically, the
model is about addressing
those threats.  From there, we can see what
territorial dynamics we
have.  In these territorial dynamics, it's
not just the territory, but
also the human element.  Already?  Entonces, por un
lado tenemos la ciencia, que es lo que
tenemos acá varios expertos que tiene
que ver con eh hacer implementar estos
planes de conservación en el territorio.
Then we talk about the social aspect; that's
where we look for ways to
bring science into the
community.  How do we do it?  creating
educational material to take with you and
then be able to share it.
Basically, our
goal is to reach colleges,
schools, universities,
people, and
people's homes.  That was always our
idea.  Then we talked about culture, and
here's something super important
because we're talking about conservation,
right?  We talk about
territorial conservation, but there is also
cultural conservation.
immaterial, which is fundamental because basically we have the territory, the culture within the territory according to the territorial dynamics, and that's where the human being appears.  Therefore, obviously we cannot apply the same model, but in all places, latitudes 22, 33 and 44, we have to approach the plan in a different way because the people are different.
We can have a map, which has been
super good because it has given us order.
And then the last level, we talk about the
economic level, which we would say is the
most difficult, which is what we are
looking for today, how to be able to achieve
this conservation, because we
have addressed all the other levels, I would
say, in an effective way, but the
economic side is a tremendous challenge and that is
where we are looking for ways to make
these places
sustainable.  And why is it so
important to understand that a private entity does
this?  Because basically what the private individual
does is go and buy the land,
then go and install the facilities.  Okay,
but how do I maintain that territory? I
want to be a concentration camp, but I don't
have the money to maintain this
territory.
I invested in the land, I invested in the
facilities, but how do I
sustain it?  Because obviously I could
close off the territory and say, "Ah,
nobody enters."  But obviously
conservation also has to be for
everyone, and opening up territories is
also an obligation so that the world can
learn about them.  So, our
private conservation was also the goal, it was to
open up to the community and that also
distinguished us and basically as I tell you,
these four dimensions have been
fundamental to the development of
our work.
S. Thank you very much, Fran.  And while you were
talking, we were looking at the images there of the
elemental reserves.  Yes, very good
work.  So congratulations.
Reservations.  Thank you.  Regarding
the model that Francisca mentioned, I wanted to
ask you, Melisa, since you have
many years of experience in the
park.  How many years have we been in
Caruquinca?
21.
21 years preserving
Caruquinca Park.  Do you know the size of
Karuquinca,
130,000,
no,
300,000 hectares.  300,000
is truly a tremendous piece of
territory.  It's a large-scale project.   They've been
managing it for quite a long time, so basically
we wanted to take advantage of you, Meli, to
tell us a little about the experience, the
learning that this private conservation has
in this vast territory and
for so long.
Oh, thanks.  Well, thank you for the
invitation and thank you all for being here.  Well
, I don't really like to
talk about private conservation,
precisely because conservation and
conservation areas are created for
people too, because they provide us
all, as we've discussed, with
immense benefits.
And one of the things, I want to take something Fran said, this thing about staying in the processes and staying in the places is very important to sustain effective conservation.  And indeed
that takes time, strength, effort, and a
lot of resources.  Uh, and there are certain
needs that are unavoidable for
effective conservation, both
technical, scientific and ethical, right?
And from the scientific and technical side,
we, well, use a
methodology which is that of
conservation standards, which is used by
many other conservation areas to
develop their planning.  And
basically what this methodology
shows us or teaches us is to
identify those elements of
nature, or biodiversity, on which we are
going to focus and
on which we are going to measure our
impact, which is super important
because when we do conservation we not only
implement actions,
but we also have to evaluate whether we
implemented them, whether we had the
desired impact in addressing these threats to
our biodiversity, but
also whether we are having a
positive impact on the health of the ecosystems
or the fauna that we use as
indicators of nature, okay?  And I
think that's one of the great
challenges that conservation has; it's
also really about
seeing if we're having an impact where
we said we were going to have it, because if
not, we're going to keep investing money in
actions like building a trail or giving an
educational talk or a workshop or
doing one or two other things.  But
indeed, and I think this is a
differentiating factor or perhaps an
important point to mention, in Caruquinca we have
already completed a second
planning cycle, at least of those that I have
led, where we have been able to
evaluate these impacts and
adjust our strategies, our
analysis of the situation in
the park, in order to
effectively adjust our actions.  Therefore, one
learning objective is the measurement of the impact
of the actions of the [unclear/organization] that
are implemented in the territory.  That
has been fundamental for you in this, I
mean, of course, it is one of the
important things when we talk about
effective conservation and being effective
in what, in improving the state or health
of nature.  Uh, and in that sense,
of course, we, I don't know, have the
threat of beavers in Caruquinca.
We can go and establish a baseline in a
watershed, set traps, well, we've already
eliminated the beaver from the watershed,
we've reduced the threat, we've removed it, but
then we have to see how we restore
that ecosystem, which is the second stage,
how we free up the waterways and how we do
active restoration, for example, of
the vegetation that was
affected.  Then, there are
the forest fires, the
feral dogs, the wild cattle, all
the threats that arise in
protected areas.  Sure, we can remove
those threats, but then we have to
see if we are actually having an
impact on nature or if there are other
things that are affecting it.  So,
early on, that
gradual monitoring that you do will
tell you if you're on the right track.
Perfect.  Excellent.  Hey, I'm going to talk now
to Juan José, my friend Juan José, who has
gone from academia to the
public sector, and now to private conservation,
right?  You have a privilege
because you have been in both of these
worlds and I wanted to ask you basically
about innovation strategies to make
conservation effective in this case
associated with The Nature Conservancy.
Okay, thank you, thank you Mauricio for the
question, thank you for the invitation, and
just to provide some context
for everyone, for those who do
n't know, TNC Conservancy has been around for a similar amount of time to what
SS has been doing
with Caruquinca here in Chile.
We're about to celebrate 22 years with the Valdivian Coastal Reserve,
which is a protected area that
we conserve today together with the
community on the Valdivia coast,
50,000 hectares. Therefore, there's
important learning to be done, precisely
in line with your question, and
also today we're working, I would say, at a
national level in the country.  And
I would like to highlight perhaps the
answer by saying that the focus of
our work as TNC today is how
we can promote private conservation
in the country.  Uh, how we are a
catalyst for that.
Therefore, we have sought in some way through our history, the lessons we have learned, the mistakes, the achievements, to test some mechanisms, to test some things and to be able to expand them, I would say, to all those who do private conservation today in the country.  So, perhaps of
the many things that have happened in 22
years, for example, perhaps many don't
know, the systematic monitoring of
camera traps that expanded to
the entire public system, was born in the
Vallivian coastal reserve in collaboration with
many actors, with scientists who
came there, with CONAF, uh, and with other
uh organizations and from there it was
taken to the system to what was the
SNASPE, the national system of
protected areas by including in the
fund, that is, taking the monitoring of
camera traps to monitor the
management plans and objects of
protection, etc.  Uh, that's an
example of how something that was being tested
there, we were looking for
the system to expand and really have an
impact, to be able to take it to a larger scale.
So, that's an example of those kinds of
innovations, or what we're trying to
do from the reserve in Valdivia,
from our projects today in
Chile.  I would say that, connecting with what
several people were saying, Sara and
Fernanda, one of our
focuses today is how we achieve
financial mechanisms, how we manage to finance
conservation by many
private entities, many communities,
many actors in the country.  TNC
had that in its
DNA from the very beginning.
In fact, the first carbon bonds, the
first certified carbon bonds
in the country, are from the
Vallivian Coastal Reserve, and they financed
part of
our operation in the reserve, but
very limitedly, and it has not yet
functioned as a mechanism that
can really be applied to all
different areas, that can really be
used on a large scale.  So, it's a
learning experience, but it also shows that
there are still some
important gaps.  Today our main
source of financing, which is an
endowment,
the operations of the reserve in
Valdivia are financed with the profits
of that fund, but it is not
enough and has forced us,
I would say, to continue making an effort to
raise resources every year.
So, there's a gap here that's still very important to keep pushing forward, and that's why I connect it with my experience also working at the Ministry of Environment, which you mentioned, and promoting the biodiversity service law, which I think is a key element in this conversation about how we push for financing instruments for all areas ultimately.  In other words, that
really serves as an example for Sara,
for Fernanda, for
nature sanctuaries, for many private ones that
are not yet
formal conservation areas of the system, but that
are providing all these
services in general.  So we've been
working on it, we can talk
about that in a bit more depth there
, but in the implementation of this
same law on payment for
ecosystem services, which we think is
key, that point is key, and also
the certification, which we see as a
tool that has been
used in other
conservation projects
globally, the certification of
areas or the certification of a
biosphere reserve, for example, and that allows
resources to be channeled to conservation.
And this is where what
Sara said is key, something we all see, and it's about how
we support the State to
implement this with the urgency and
capabilities that are needed.  The State
alone cannot possibly carry this out in a
timely manner and with the necessary capabilities.  And so
one of our, I would say, obsessions
as TNC is to be able to accompany in that, to be
able to generate enabling conditions, to be
able to generate capacity; collaboration
in this is key, eh, to be able to promote
this on a larger scale.  So,
I would say that in that sense, the
biodiversity service, the law, is an
enabling condition so
that these benefits can be translated on a
larger scale to contribute to
conservation initiatives at the national level.  And
there's just one point that I think is
important to mention, which I believe
connects with what Francisca was saying,
we were talking about it before, and that is that in my
experience processing the law in
Congress, for example, to give
a very concrete example, when one
talked to parliamentarians about
private conservation in Chile, the level
of ignorance of what that
means was brutal.  It was seen as
something done by people, using many resources
for something of their own, personal, without any
knowledge about the services
provided, the value that this generates
and the effort of many people,
communities without any resources that have been
made for conservation.  So, part
of this is also how we
generate that
public awareness of the effort behind it,
the values ​​that conservation generates
in that sense.  Y eso sí lo conecto con
lo que comentaste al principio de
Capital Natural, la digamos que la
agenda capital natural que corre quizás
a un nivel mucho más arriba, no es tan
no es concreta, digamos, en los
territorios, pero que es clave.  We need to
make it concrete.   It needs to be
made concrete, and something
concrete is that it is understood that
biodiversity generates value in
human well-being at an economic level, in
all our dimensions, which is key,
and so understanding it from
that logic is super important.
Thank you, Juan José.  I'm going to reverse
the word order a little if you'll
allow me.  And if not, I'm the
moderator, so no.  Look, I'd like to
double-click with you right now,
Juan José.  Look, I remember
many years ago we were with, uh, with
a hashtag, I want to vape, that's what it said, it
wasn't very good because "svape" isn't a very good
acronym, it's just consonants,
right?  Except for one, well, the truth is that
this law was achieved, the
pre-nature law, as this government called it, and there is a
specific
financing mechanism with the creation of the SVAP.
You just mentioned payment for
ecosystem services.  How do you
envision those financial mechanisms?
With the implementation of these
new laws and regulations that are being
processed.
Well, I think it's important to
comment on a few things related
to this very briefly because it
connects with what several
panelists were also discussing.  The first thing is that the
law innovated in creating a system of
paraprivate entities, that is,
private governance, so to speak,
precisely in which private individuals can
transform their private lands into
formal protected areas, and there are five
categories to transform
their conservation project into
something formal that contributes to the country's goals.   to
say that a private entity is contributing to
the goals that Chile has today for
2030, which were established in the agreement
with Montreal.  Therefore, there is
a hook there that is super important
and one in private will be able to be a
national park with that governance or a
multi-use area, etc.  And that
already brings certain benefits, and that's
important with certain
things that need to be achieved, but today
that comes with a
tax extension for contributions.
We in the coastal reserve,
despite having 50,000
hectares for conservation,
currently pay more than 80 million
pesos a year in taxes, just in
taxes, for a piece of land that, I
mean, a territory that we work our butts off
all year raising resources,
managing it with the community, and we have to
pay these taxes that don't make much
sense.  Well, the law was
innovative in creating that exemption from
that tax at least.  But as
Sara says, which I think is super important,
it still comes from a logic of
how we demand things from the private sector, how
we monitor it, how it has to
account to us for what it does despite the
effort that private entities make in
conservation.  So, there are a number
of rules to follow in order for the
taxes to be triggered.  There has to be
an operational management plan
, but that's why it's
key that it's well implemented,
that the service and its regulations are
well implemented.  That is something very
concrete and very precise.
We have to work on all of that.
Hey, let's keep an eye on
that issue, shall we?  Listen, I'd like to hear from
Francisca again now,
because Juan José was just talking about
the communities, right?  So I
wanted to ask you basically what
you, as
Cortés Solarí Philanthropy, have learned in
effectively linking local communities
with this conservation work; that
is, how is this amalgamation between
biological conservation and this intangible aspect
that you were talking about?
Thank you.  Well, it's been a tremendous
challenge, obviously, working with
communities, I think it's one of
the great challenges we all have.
Well, the most important thing, I think, is that it requires a lot of time, it requires rebuilding lost trust, because I really think that is the first and main threat we have to being able to dialogue with the communities, given the distrust that exists between the parties.  Now,
as I was saying,
in these three territories
we work from a cultural perspective, so
how do we approach the
community?  We initially decided to
preserve the immaterial.
Uh, we did two projects, one that had
to do with rescuing; there were many
grandparents who were already old in the
back, uh, with their trades, with their
stories, and these grandparents were already passing away
.  So, the first thing we
did was rescue these stories,
rescue this history.  And I remember deep down
that before we started
doing territorial conservation,
we quickly got involved with the
grandparents because we saw that it was very
important to work with them, to
get all the information to
safeguard that intangible cultural heritage
that also belongs to us
as part of history.   We
saw that as very important.  And
the other thing is that working in San
Pedro de Atacama also led us
to understand how to approach these
communities, and what
we did was go to the
main actors.  Then what we did was a school where in that school we didn't teach the people from the communities, but in those schools what we did was, for a year we worked with the cultural practitioners, who are the people who carry on the ancestral trades.
So, we worked with them
so that they would have
educational activities to do during their
class time or activity time.
So, we have always been
intermediaries.  We
have never interfered; they
facilitate the space and connection of
that wisdom.  Exactly.  So, super important in essence, in fact, that project that we did in San Pedro, Atacama with the communities, I think it was a tremendously successful project also because later the communities became independent, therefore, each one today, currently, has its own programs.
So, they work in ecotourism, they
work, uh, I don't know, in the case of San
Pedro, uh, with the herds of llamas, they
work with agriculture and all that they
are transposing to the subject of
tourism.  So, of course, sometimes I'm
talking about this because this
program was created 15 years ago, so
this program was born a year ago, but this program
is still like a program being born, but
this program is still developing
because ultimately what we did in the
north we are now replicating
in the south as well.  Today we are
working with the Kahuescar, the
Yaganes and the ONA, basically
really with the trades, with the
Kahuescar, but we obviously try to
emphasize that conservation is not
only about the territory, but
also about the culture and I think there is
something super important there.
And how have they been able to link both
worlds, let's say, in the territory of
culture and conservation?  The
two things go hand in hand.  So, I
think they go hand in hand, and from the moment
you put it, for
example, we already have 10
books of ancestral trades, those 10
books are a heritage of Chile.  The
thing is, we made the 10
books, it took us 3 years to make
the 10 books, 4 years of which were spent on
top-level infographics.  Okay,
let's get the books out.  But what's going on there?
What happened?  Then we just released
books that we
presented worldwide, not even
here in Chile.  Climate change,
indigenous people, this is how they open the doors for us.
But here, the
books are actually.  Obviously, the effort
we make behind this to
continue working with culture,
with trades, with communities,
with native peoples, is fundamentally ongoing; it's
not
something that has a beginning and an
end.  And we continue to do so, and
we will surely continue to look for
alliances, ways, methods, but I think the
most effective thing has been to rescue
their culture.
And that they can
develop ecotourism based on their own
culture within their own territories.
Clear.
Excellent.  Thank you very much, Francisca.
I'm coming back to you, Sara.  Well, you
have put together a network of sanctuaries.  I
imagine it's not so easy to put together
a network of sanctuaries of, as you say,
13 different families or 13 different communities.
Um, and I'd like to ask you a little about what
the challenges have been
for this articulation and to
relate what Francisca was saying
to tourism.  How do you view
tourism?  What type of tourism do they view
favorably, such as a network?  Um, how do
you see this collaboration and tourism?
Sara, the microphone, please.
Look, before anything else I had brought some educational brochures, others more like excursion brochures and another one about one of the sanctuaries, so attendees who want to can take it later.  I forgot to mention that at the
beginning.
Perfect.  Excellent.  E
lo que lo que señalaba Francisca, la
verdad es que es absolutamente clave.  In
other words, when one goes to a territory, it is not
a territory with only
biodiversity, the flora and fauna that
we know.  This biodiversity includes human communities and their customs and traditions, etc., and it is the social aspect of conservation, but we don't differentiate the challenges much.
So the first thing we've generally done in the sanctuaries, and in that sense, I think the methodology of open standards, which is this element of seeing what Melisa explained, is to see what the objects of conservation are and in which we are going to look at their state, their evolution, for better or for worse.  And in relation to
that, we'll see how the rest works.
I believe that when we look at these objects of
observation, see the threats,
and see what we need to
face those threats, the
first thing that immediately comes to mind is the issue of the
human community that is in their
territory,
and that in one way or another,
conservation has no future if
we do not manage to incorporate the
human community and for that human community to take
ownership
of that conservation project.
And that's why what Francisca said is so key: the ancients have a clear understanding of a different relationship with the land, and there are also patterns of communication and language, and therefore you immediately bring tradition to the service of the conservation of the land and environmental values.  So, I think that
point is fundamental, having
homogenized,
for example, in the case of all the
nature sanctuaries, all
13 sanctuaries have
management plans based on open standards
and therefore we all know what
the conservation objectives of each one are,
what the threats are and what the
strategy is over time
to reduce those threats, conserve
and at the same time be able to measure and that is why
we have management plans every 10 years.
Most of them have it, and Fernanda was
referring to that.  While it is true that we all
have management plans, more than
half of the sanctuaries have been
waiting for 4 years.
Clear.
The stamp of the Central Ministry will
become obsolete when it is approved.
Claro, they are from the year 2019, plans
2020 2030 we are still in 2025.  They don't
have the ministry's stamp, even though they
are approved by the
regional secretary, but the ministry, and therefore
legally, if we were to enter the
biodiversity service and the
tax franchise, we
couldn't because the ministry hasn't
approved the plans for us.  Anyway, I've already left
, but I wanted to ask you
specifically about the
tourism potential in the sanctuary network.  Well,
the important thing is that one of the
elements that is seen as relevant
to the local community, but also
to enhance the value of that territory, not
only from a perspective of flora and
fauna, but also so that this flora and fauna
and its conservation contribute to the
economic development of
economic activities linked to that territory,
is that tourism emerges as one of the
obvious elements.  And in the case of
Aculeo, in the case of Cajón del Maipo,
in the case of Balnechea for the
sanctuaries that are in the mountain range,
clearly there are many people who
today live from activities linked to
tourism, but they are typical
camping activities, or selling things, but they do
not have a purpose.  He is exhausted
or goes to mountain sports, but he does not
have a component of going deeper and
therefore fulfilling both
elements, generating
economic activity, but at the same time
deepening awareness about the value
of the element.
So, for example, one of the elements—and you presented it as a Gore project, which is the one we are working on as a sanctuary network with the regional government—is how we use some anchors for tourism activity to innovate in the tourism offer, but at the same time to bring people into a deeper relationship with a type of fauna called flagship species.  Clear.
So, for example, the repopulation of
guanacos in the Andes Mountains in
the metropolitan region, which is not yet in place
because they are coming down to the
Valparaíso region, there are cypress trees in the sixth
region, but in the
metropolitan region they are only in Cruz de
Piedra where about 300 guanacos are already wintering
.   It's
amazing what
conservation can do.   It's
impressive, and that's been the case for the
last 10 years.
So, what happens if we respect this repopulation in the Yeso Valley, also, not only in the Maipo Valley, but also later in the Tupungato Valley, which faces Vannechea and which faces Los Glaciares Park and the area that you are working on with the support of all of us for the decree.  So here we have
an element, for example, of the
development of tourism in
protected areas with high standards.  Uh,
we are thinking and all the workshops
are geared towards standards of the
International Union for Conservation of
Nature, in order to
harmonize
the activities and criteria
of nature tourism with the criteria
of biodiversity conservation.
So, you achieve two elements there.
You manage to generate a
high-level tourist activity, in the
sense that it is compatible with the
conservation of biodiversity.
Second, you broaden the tourism offering
to include nature tourism, not just
running or hiking, but
also nature tourism, and therefore
you contribute knowledge about that
territory and at the same time
generate the possibility of
local training.  For example, today
the Association of Guides of the
Maipo Canyon is studying leave no trace, uh, they are
seeing what cerophytic vegetation is
, which they didn't even know what it
was, or the Andean sclerophyllous forest
has a difference with the
coastal sclerophyllous forest, etc., etc.
Then
the capacity of
professionals increases, and that implies a
greater possibility of generating other
economic activities such as
education, but also special tourism or
niche tourism such as
bird watching or horseback riding, where the muleteers
themselves can be retrained and go on
horseback riding tours to see the guanacos.  In other words
, we are essentially generating
listening
.  We are creating the
possibility that, in addition to
traditional environmental services,
we can generate local economies
based on those environmental services, and
there we create a circularity of the match
between economy and environmental protection.
Excellent, Sara.  Melissa, I'm coming with you
now.
Look, we've talked about financial mechanisms, we've talked about effective conservation models, we've talked about how to integrate the community, and now we're also talking about how we integrate tourism as a tremendous opportunity.  And I wanted to ask
you about the connection with
science, especially given your experience
.  You also come from the
world of science.  So, I wanted to
ask you
what role science plays in what
we're talking about?  What has
your experience been like in that regard?  Yes.
Well, it
's off, it seems, but we have a lot of
microphones to pass on.  Let's see.
Hello.   Yes, that's it
.  Already.   Already.  Well,
indeed WCS is an
organization that bases its
conservation and
nature management decisions on science, and that means
we use the best
available information or ask
relevant questions to improve the management
of the areas.  And well, Karuquinca
has been no different in that respect.  We, of
course, have our management plan.
We have had support from several
research scientists, given that
our team is also small, in
formulating these questions that are
functional to the management of
biodiversity, particularly in
Caruoquinca.  And science
has given us information over time
to improve these practices.  Um, for
example, I don't know, we, I'm going back to
the example of beavers, but
beavers build their dams in
ecosystems that affect
peatland ecosystems.  We have
large peat bog wetlands in
Caruquinca, subantarctic forests
too; almost half of the park is
subantarctic forest, and the beavers, when they
build their dams, flood large
areas, and we have been wondering if
we remove the dams, what happens to Guas
downstream and what happens to Guas upstream of those
dams?  We are going to drain peat bogs and what
happens to the effect on
gas exchange, on the hydrology of these
ecosystems.  So, we're kind of
asking ourselves, and asking
science too, well, are
dams worth it everywhere or not?
We are generating more impact with
this management decision.  So, in
that sense, science has been a great
contribution.  Also recognizing that
hard science is not the only knowledge or the
only way we value as a source
for making decisions.  Uh, as has been
discussed here, culture.  We
recently incorporated the Selnam people into our new planning cycle
because we learned in
2018 that they were a living people,
they were considered extinct by academia, and
we all believed that story, and now they
are part of our governance. We are
helping them in their own
cultural restoration, and that also means that
they are
reconnecting with the
territory, but we are
also going to see how we integrate that knowledge
into our management.
And one last thing that scientists
have also been super relevant in
contributing to our team of
park rangers who are not
ranch caretakers nor are they
security guards for the people who come, but they
are biologists and they are the ones
who do the monitoring, they do
the patrols, they do the censuses
of condors, elephants, margays,
guanacos, albatrosses, they go to band them.
Uh, so in that sense
we have also been training our team in
science
and local people also participate in
those science activities.
Yes. Well, Tierra del Fuego isn't a
place with a large population, although there
are more and more people, but we do have
strong ties with the schools, obviously those in
the province of Tierra del Fuego, and with the
municipality; we are part of the Timaukel Chamber of
Tourism.  So, the
opportunity this has also given us
, that we are not so many actors in the
territory, is that we can add to
these efforts and obviously link up
with everyone because it is a
huge territory, we are few, of course, we
are an NGO, we have 10 park rangers,
we have some permanent funding
in the same way as with the same
mechanism, let's say, as TNC, but even so
we can only manage 10% of the
territory and therefore everything that
happens in the other areas of the park
necessarily requires us to link up
with the neighbors.
S. Thank you very much, Melisa.  You won't
believe it, but we're running out of
time, so I'm going to
ask my friend Fernanda the hardest question
.  Okay, so we can
integrate this, Fernanda, look, we've
talked about different topics,
financing mechanisms, we've been
talking about the importance
of tourism, about networking,
how we strengthen this network that is
multi-scale, multi-institutional,
interdisciplinary, how do we integrate
science?  The models we are using, the community, how we can bring all this to private conservation, to develop quality private conservation, to professionalize it.
How do you see the future of
private conservation?
Yes, I mean, well, I think that despite
everything, today is a time of more
hope than it was some time ago.  At
least the service exists today.  There is
a reality.  Well,
we sometimes prefer the word "
voluntary" to "private" when it comes to conservation.  The term "private"
sometimes has a somewhat heavy connotation
, because it's also nice to recognize
that these are voluntary areas; nobody was
forced to enter into this, but rather, out of their own free
will, people
give up many things in order to
make these areas available to
nature, allowing
nature to continue there.  So, I
mean, well, I think there are many
paths laid out, like the value of
what is here, which is the
sanctuary network, that preserves Chile.
That's precisely it's about getting to know the path of our peers and those who are starting out, because, for example, TNC, the Valdivian Coastal Reserve has been a benchmark for many areas. We ourselves, like Cantillana, I've always said it, were our first, because conservation 20 years ago, Cantillana turned 18 this year, so 20 years ago, this conservation thing was like crazy.
tú empezabas porque eran propietarios
que empezaron a despertar muchas veces
lo que vemos, eh, que tenían estas
tierras, algunos las fueron adquiriendo,
pero empiezas con un ímpetu de decir,
realmente este lugar es especial y le
están pasando cosas a los lugares como
este.  I don't want that to happen, I want
this hill to remain a hill.
That journey began and it was crazy, you know?  It was
like, because generally everyone
starts with "because this crazy guy closed the hill,"
eh, because what's going on?
The country had no tools, you know, like there was conservation
elsewhere, but in Chile.
So, for example, there's also the legacy
of Tomkins, I think he also
opened things up.  Do you remember everything that
Tomkins said?
Yes, it was the devil, wasn't it?
Remember when he was going to take over the country?   I
mean, yes.
And well, that's how it happens on that scale in all the places where conservation initiatives begin because it was rare in a place, I mean, and it still looks rare today.  The thing is, we're a
closed group, and we often try to
expand, but we're also,
like the Groundhog Club said, stuck in a rut.
But sometimes you step outside that
circle, and there are people who say, "No, there's
something here."  How can someone want to
give up everything just for the sake of giving up?
Well, today we have made progress, we look to the future with more hope because we know that there are several of us, we know each other, there are many instances where we meet.  So, I think that,
and we have a service, it's delicate,
the moment is worrying.  Just in case,
there are citizen consultations
open and available online.
Everyone can contribute to the
consultations on the regulations of the
biodiversity service.  Today it is open in the priority areas, which are large areas already, and they have deadlines of one month, sometimes two months for. So, it is important to do it as a civil citizen, as a participant, of course, because today and tomorrow that will be what sets the guidelines for us.
That's right, do you
understand?  And the problem is that
everyone here is
participating in these consultations.  The
problem is that the ministry proposes and
the citizens decide, and the citizens are not
the civil society that wants to
preserve it.
Fiensa believes that part of that society includes
all the guilds that ultimately see the
law and the biodiversity service as
a threat
because it comes to protect nature,
which is where resources are
often extracted from.
So, the fights are fierce and it's important that as citizens, if we want to contribute something, for example, just be there and say yes, we want the priority sites, please don't keep cutting them, they've already been cut and there are other laws, there are other regulations.  So, well, but
I, look, wanted to kind of approach this as if I
think, I mean, we look to the future with
hope.  I believe that the value of
networks, this transmission of
information, the TNC work, that is,
we are in a process, for example, of
support, of homologation of the sanctuaries,
there are other areas that are looking at the
possibility of being affected.
Everything that will happen with biodiversity services, and what private conservation will look like in the future, depends on how many incentives or disincentives there are.  That's why it's so
delicate, because if you tell
someone who hasn't gotten involved that they're
actually going to impose all these
conditions, which may be because many of us
are willing to submit, but there's
also diversity.  Not all of us are
going to be national parks,
there are more possibilities, you know?  And that's something we have to
take into account, right?  No, the
vision of conservation doesn't have to
be that strict conservation, you know?
There are other possibilities too, but
besides the fact that it takes 5 years to get
a document approved, things like that, we have to
support the
State services, improve them, look at mechanisms and that's why it's
important to participate because that
will decide whether it's really
attractive later on and also, of course, the
economic incentives.  If that's the
issue, even large NGOs have
difficulties, but why don't we have
enough resources to
conserve nature?  Because we still haven't
grasped everything that nature
gives us, we still don't understand.
And well, and with this I conclude, I believe that part of this crisis of nature that we have, the crisis, the environmental problems, climate change, the triple crisis, in short, the loss of biodiversity, is a problem that was born from human beings and is of human beings.  In other
words, before the environmental crisis
there was the human crisis of
disconnection from nature.  That's what
brought us to this place.
The problem is that people disconnected, and today there are many who don't even know that this connection existed. People are starting to rediscover it, and from this perspective, for example, this new concept of wellness tourism is emerging, which is closely linked to nature's services. Ultimately, I feel this despair when I think about how people don't even take care of themselves sometimes; there are very few notions of self-care.  I explain to him that he also has to
take care of the soil and the vegetation.  If
then Chile, in terms of, for example,
adolescence, has the highest
suicide rate in Latin America.  And that's when I realize,
that there's
a problem with human beings that
unfortunately we all
have to help address in some way, and
we can do it with nature and we
can do it with tourism to help
heal nature.  We could call it the healing of
nature or its conservation
, but we also need to
heal it, which is absolutely
linked to this reconnection
with human beings.
Hey, what a great ending, Fernanda.
Thank you very much for your work.
Thank you, Fernanda.  Hey, thank you
Melisa, thank you Francisca, thank you Sara,
thank you Juan José for this panel and for
promoting this connection between
people and nature.  So thanks
to you all, and we almost met the
schedule.